rats are clever animals they're easily
trainable consider this as a rat school
for the last three years we are working
at that's being used for the detection
of tuberculosis which is very promising
in fact because on a weekly basis we
pick out about temptations which have
been missed in hospital TB he kills half
a million people a year in Africa one
and a half thousand everyday the rats
could detect early signs of the virus in
human saliva everytime they identify a
positive sample the trainer's make a
click sound and a food reward of mashed
banana follows these rats are at an
early stage of training to get them used
to the click sound makes us to
communicate with around the moment when
they hear this sound music it has to
stop
40s is doing the count for food they
then have to learn that sniffing in a
hole will lead to the clip and reward
I thought they ought to know how to put
the whole how to put it in notes on the
whole then it will be easy when I
present the example on that whole and
that is the way how they write there are
further stages to accustom the rats to
the smell of the virus and then to
indicate when they have smelt it once
this is done the rats know that a width
of TB results in a tasty treat the
training that this rat school is highly
effective what would take a human
scientist all day to diagnose takes the
rats a mere seven minutes they're also
extremely accurate
we've got people now coming
automatically to us and can our rats can
your ads test us for to the Colossus
because they had hardened in the
newspapers in several places all right
picking out some cases which are missed
by the conventional metals so what makes
a rat sense of smell so superior to
humans
this is banner Rao a cheese shop owner
with a famous sense of smell one of the
best cheese noses in UK I have judged
three international chief competition
and our judge two British cheese
competitions I am a cheese expert and
this is Mandy the rat one of the
Tanzanian rat schools champion sniffers
mandis nose makes about eight sniffs per
second compared to about two for Banu
and the rest of us each other
Nessa Stilton Sabri it smells worse than
a pig it is a smelly and wash rind
cheese then this is a blue cheese carbon
blue posters while Spano is very good at
identifying types of cheese simply from
their smell Mandy sniffs in stereo she
can differentiate two very similar
smells with just one sniff about one in
every hundred of Mandy's jeans is given
over to odor detection poor ol Bono has
to make do with one in every thousand
from a droplet of urine left by another
rat Mandy can determine its gender
sexual maturity and reproductive status
now that's one test we won't be trying
on Bhanu